W-14577441-db-inout-parameters-kt (#2436)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: db/1.14/modules/ROOT/pages/database-connector-input-output-parameters.adoc

= Configuring Input and Output Parameters for Stored Procedures

Configure input or output parameters for the *Stored procedure* operation of Anypoint Connector for Database (Database Connector) to specify the parameters that a stored procedure uses. There are input parameters (values passed into the procedure), output parameters (values returned by the procedure), or in out parameters, which are a combination of both.

> In Anypoint Studio, you can configure the parameters for the Stored procedure operation by using the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Anypoint Studio, you can configure the parameters for the *Stored procedure* operation by using the following fields:
```

* *Input parameters* 
+

> These are parameters for which values are provided as inputs to the stored procedure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters for which values are provided as inputs to the stored procedure
```

+
You typically pass values from your Mule app to the stored procedure through these parameters.

* *Output parameters*
+

> These are parameters used to return values from the stored procedure back to your Mule app.

Reviewer: Same comment as above

+
After executing the stored procedure, you can retrieve the values assigned to these parameters.

* *In out parameters*
+

> These parameters serve a dual purpose; they act as both input and output parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters that act as both input and output parameters.
```

+
You can pass a value into the stored procedure through these parameters.

> == Configure Input Parameters

Reviewer: Need a blank line under the heading

> Consider a scenario where you are developing a Mule app to manage customer orders. In this case, you retrieve order information from a database using a stored procedure that takes parameters such as the customer ID and order status. The following example illustrates how to configure the *Input parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to dynamically fetch order details based on specific criteria:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario in which you develop a Mule app to manage customer orders. In this case, you retrieve order information from a database by using a stored procedure that takes parameters such as the customer ID and order status. 

The following example illustrates how to configure the *Input parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to dynamically fetch order details based on specific criteria:
```

> . In Studio, add a Database Configuration element to your Mule app project and configure it with the necessary MySQL database connection details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In Studio, add a *Database Configuration* element to your Mule app project and configure it with the necessary MySQL database connection details.
```

> . Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas that retrieves the order information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the *Stored procedure* operation that retrieves the order information to your canvas.
```
```suggestion
. Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas that retrieves the order information.
```

> . Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas that retrieves the order information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas to retrieve the order information.
```

. Select the operation from your flow.
. In the *SQL Query text* field, enter `{call GetOrderDetails(:customerId, :orderStatus)}`.
+

> This defines the SQL statement for calling the stored procedure `GetOrderDetails` with two named parameters `customerId` and `orderStatus`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This defines the SQL statement for calling the stored procedure `GetOrderDetails` with the named parameters `customerId` and `orderStatus`.
```

Reviewer: or "with two named parameters: `customerId` and `orderStatus`.

> . In the *Input parameters* field, enter the following expression that fetches order details:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Input parameters* field, enter the following expression to fetch the order details:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
{
        "name": "customerId",
        "type": "INTEGER",
        "value": #[flowVars.customerId]
    },
    {
        "name": "orderStatus",
        "type": "VARCHAR",
        "value": #[message.inboundProperties['orderStatus']]
    }
----
* `name`
+

> The name of the input parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Name of the input parameter.
```

Reviewer: Global edit - remove the lead-ins from the first paragraph of these descriptions

* `type`
+

> The data type of the input parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datatype of the input parameter
```

* `value`
+
The value of the input parameter, specified using Mule expression syntax.

> The configuration enables you to fetch order details based on the provided customer ID and order status dynamically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration enables you to dynamically fetch order details based on the provided customer ID and order status.
```

In the *Configuration XML* editor, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:stored-procedure config-ref="Database_Config" doc:name="Stored Procedure">
    <db:sql>
        <![CDATA[{call GetOrderDetails(:customerId, :orderStatus)}]]>
    </db:sql>
    <db:input-parameters>
        <![CDATA[#[{
            "name": "customerId",
            "type": "INTEGER",
            "value": #[flowVars.customerId]
        },
        {
            "name": "orderStatus",
            "type": "VARCHAR",
            "value": #[message.inboundProperties['orderStatus']]
        }]]]>
    </db:input-parameters>
</db:stored-procedure>
----

== Configure Output Parameters

> Consider a scenario, where you develop a Mule app for an online retail system. The Mule app manages order processing, and you want to implement a feature to retrieve order details and calculate the total amount of an order from a MySQL database using a stored procedure. The stored procedure returns details such as the order items and quantities, and the total amount as an output parameter. The following example demonstrates how to configure the *Output parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to fetch order details and the total amount dynamically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario in which you develop a Mule app for an online retail system. The Mule app manages order processing, and you want to use a stored procedure to implement a feature that retrieves order details and calculates the total amount of an order from a MySQL database. In this scenario, the stored procedure returns details such as the order items, order quantities, and the total amount as an output parameter. 

The following example illustrates how to configure the *Output parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to fetch the order details and total amount dynamically.
```

> Consider a scenario, where you develop a Mule app for an online retail system. The Mule app manages order processing, and you want to implement a feature to retrieve order details and calculate the total amount of an order from a MySQL database using a stored procedure. The stored procedure returns details such as the order items and quantities, and the total amount as an output parameter. The following example demonstrates how to configure the *Output parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to fetch order details and the total amount dynamically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario in which you develop a Mule app for an online retail system. In this scenario, the Mule app manages order processing, and you want to implement a feature to retrieve order details and calculate the total amount of an order from a MySQL database by using a stored procedure. The stored procedure returns details such as the order items and quantities and the total amount as an output parameter. 

The following example demonstrates how to configure the *Output parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to fetch the order details and total amount dynamically.
```

> . In Studio, add a Database Configuration element to your MuleSoft app project and configure it with the necessary MySQL database connection details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In Studio, add a *Database Configuration* element to your MuleSoft app project and configure it with the necessary MySQL database connection details.
```

> . Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas that retrieves the order information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas to retrieve the order information.
```

. Select the operation from your flow.
. In the *SQL Query text* field, enter `{call GetOrderDetails(:orderId, :totalAmount, :orderDetails)}`.
+

> This defines the SQL statement for calling the stored procedure `GetOrderDetails` retrieving output parameters such as `orderId`, `totalAmount`, and `orderDetails`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This defines the SQL statement for calling the stored procedure `GetOrderDetails` and retrieving output parameters such as `orderId`, `totalAmount`, and `orderDetails`.
```

+
. Set *Output parameters* to *Edit inline*.

> . Click the plus icon to open the Output parameter window.

Reviewer: Here, you don't bold Output parameter but in the next bullet, you do.

> . In the *Output parameter* window, set the following parameters:

Reviewer: Assign values to the following parameters:

+
[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
|Key | Type
|orderId | INTEGER
|totalAmount | Decimal
|orderDetails | ARRAY
|===
+
[start=7]
. Click *Finish*.

> The configuration enables you to execute the stored procedure, retrieving output parameters such as the order ID, total amount, and order details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration enables you to execute the stored procedure to retrieve output parameters such as the order ID, total amount, and order details.
```

Reviewer: I don't think that you need this paragraph. It is repetitive with the lead-in to the example.

In the *Configuration XML* editor, the configuration looks like this:
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:stored-procedure config-ref="MySQL_Configuration" doc:name="Stored Procedure">
    <db:sql><![CDATA[{call GetOrderDetails(:orderId, :totalAmount, :orderDetails)}]]></db:sql>
    <db:output-parameters>
        <![CDATA[#[{
            "name": "orderId",
            "type": "INTEGER"
        },
        {
            "name": "totalAmount",
            "type": "DECIMAL"
        },
        {
            "name": "orderDetails",
            "type": "ARRAY"
        }]]]>
    </db:output-parameters>
</db:stored-procedure>
----

== Configure In Out Parameters

> Consider a scenario where you develop a Mule app for an inventory management system to handle the process of updating the stock levels for specific products. The Mule app interacts with a stored procedure named `UpdateStockLevel` in a PostgreSQL database, which requires both input and output parameters. This following example illustrates how to configure the *In out parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to manage the stock level updates, including both the input data (product ID and quantity) and the output data (updated stock level).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario in which you develop a Mule app for an inventory management system to handle the process of updating the stock levels for specific products. In this scenario, the Mule app interacts with a stored procedure named `UpdateStockLevel` in a PostgreSQL database, which requires both input and output parameters. 

The following example illustrates how to configure the *In out parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to manage the stock level updates, including both the input data (product ID and quantity) and the output data (updated stock level):
```

> . In Studio, add a Database Configuration element to your MuleSoft app project and configure it with the necessary PostgreSQL database connection details.

Reviewer: Shouldn't the element name be bolded? Maybe not. I'll stop marking these.

> . Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas that retrieves the order information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas to retrieve the order information.
```

. Select the operation from your flow.
. In the *SQL Query text* field, enter `{call UpdateStockLevel(:productId, :quantity, :updatedStockLevel)}`.
+

> This defines the SQL statement for calling a stored procedure UpdateStockLevel with input parameters productId and quantity, and an output parameter updatedStockLevel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates an SQL statement that calls a stored procedure named `UpdateStockLevel` with the `productId` and `quantity` input parameters and the`updatedStockLevel` output parameter.
```

. Set *In out parameters* to *Edit inline*.
. Click the plus icon to open the *In out parameter* window.

> . In the *In out parameter* window, set the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *In out parameter* window, assign values to the following parameters:
```

+
[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
|Key | Value
|productId | #[payload.productId]
|quantity | #[payload.quantity]
|updatedStockLevel | (empty)
|===
+
[start=8]
. Click *Finish*.

> The configuration enables you to execute the stored procedure, providing input parameters product ID and quantity, and retrieving the updated stock level as an output parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration enables you to execute the stored procedure, providing input parameters product ID and quantity, and retrieving the updated stock level as an output parameter.
```

Reviewer: Can you delete this paragraph? It seems redundant.

In the *Configuration XML* editor, the configuration looks like this:
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:stored-procedure doc:name="Stored procedure"			
<db:sql ><db:in-out-parameters >
			</db:in-out-parameters><![CDATA[{call UpdateStockLevel(:productId, :quantity, :updatedStockLevel)}]]>
			</db:sql>
			<db:in-out-parameters >
				<db:in-out-parameter key="updatedStockLevel" />
				<db:in-out-parameter key="productId" value="#[payload.productId]" />
				<db:in-out-parameter key="quantity" value="#[payload.quantity]" />
			</db:in-out-parameters>
----

== Configure Custom Types

The ability to use custom types as parameters in stored procedures depends on the database system you are using and the capabilities of the Database Connector or framework you are working with. 

> Exercise caution when you work with an Oracle database vendor and use the *Stored procedure* operation with custom database types. 

Reviewer: Not clear if this is saying that you need to use custom database types if you work with an Oracle vendor or if it is saying to exercise caution when using custom database types. If the latter change "and" to "or."

> When you define the stored procedure within a package, set the column type of a custom type parameter in the connector connection settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When you define a stored procedure within a package, set the column type of a custom type parameter in the connector connection settings:
```

. In Studio, open the Database Config Global Element Properties window.
. Click the *Advanced* tab.
. Set *Column types* to *Edit inline*.

> . Click the plus sign to open the *Column types* window.

Reviewer: Sometimes you bold window names and sometimes you don't. This should be consistent. I think that they should be bolded.

> . In the *Column types* window, set *Id* and *Type name* fields with your desired values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Column types* window, set the *Id* and *Type name* fields with your desired values.
```

. Click *OK*.

image::database-column-type.png[Column type configuration window]

In the *Configuration XML* editor window, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:column-types >
<db:column-type id="2003" typeName="MY_CUSTOM_PKG.MY_CUSTOM_TYPE" />
</db:column-types>
----

> It remains a good practice to define the *Column types* of a custom type parameter, even if the stored procedure is not part of a package but is directly defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a good practice to define the *Column types* of a custom type parameter, even if the stored is defined directly and is not part of a package.
```

Reviewer: Can you just say "... is not part of a package" and remove "is defined directly"?

> == Configuration Limitations

Reviewer: Leave a blank line after the header for readability in the AsciiDoc.

I would call these "considerations: instead of "limitations" because the behavior is by design. Saying "considerations" is more positive.

Consider the following limitations when you configure *In out parameters*.

> === Variable Values Reflection

Reviewer: Is this really a "Reflection"? Maybe "Variable Values in Stored Procedures."

> This is a limitation of the Mule runtime engine (Mule) and applies to all database vendors. You might expect that if you pass a variable with a given set of values to the stored procedure as *In out parameters*, the variable can contain modified values after the operation completes. This is not the case, as these variables are not modified. This is how Mule works by design. The modified values are part of the operation's payload instead. To illustrate this limitation, consider the following scenario:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following consideration applies to all database vendors. In Mule runtime engine (Mule, if you pass a variable with a given set of values to a stored procedure as *In out parameters*, the variable cannot contain modified values after the operation completes. The modified values are part of the operation's payload, instead. 

To illustrate this behavior, consider the following scenario:
```

Reviewer: I don't think the limitation above is a limitation, since it is by design. I suggest calling a consideration instead.

Do you need to say that this applies to all database vendors?

> A parameter registered as *In out parameters* has a value stored in a variable named `foo`. If `vars.foo` is passed to the stored procedure, `vars.foo` retains its original value after the operation is invoked. This behavior can have a challenge, especially when chaining stored procedures. You might expect that when you call the stored procedure A, the value of "vars.foo" would change, allowing them to subsequently call the stored procedure B with the already modified values. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A parameter registered as *In out parameters* has a value stored in a variable named `foo`. If `vars.foo` is passed to the stored procedure, `vars.foo`, it retains its original value after the operation is invoked. When you chain stored procedures, you might expect that when you call stored procedure `A`, the value of `vars.foo` would change, allowing you to subsequently call stored procedure `B` with the already modified values. 
```

> However, in reality, the modified data is returned as an entry in the payload after the operation executes. The payload contains modified values which the stored procedure may produce. Consequently, chaining of stored procedures is feasible by invoking only one stored procedure per operation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the modified data is returned as an entry in the payload after the operation executes. The payload contains modified values that the stored procedure can create. Consequently, chaining stored procedures is feasible by invoking only one stored procedure per operation.
```

Reviewer: Do you need the second sentence? It seems redundant. Maybe you can combine it with the first one if you can't remove it.

> Use the xref:database-stored-udt-stored-procedure.adoc#using-preparestruct-and-preparearray-functions[prepareArray and prepareStruct functions] to properly format the data for the *Stored procedure* operation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the xref:database-stored-udt-stored-procedure.adoc#using-preparestruct-and-preparearray-functions[`prepareArray` and `prepareStruct` functions] to properly format the data for the *Stored procedure* operation. 
```

> === Returning Data Format

Reviewer: I suggest: Data Format for Returned Data

> The *Stored procedure* operation returns data in a format that differs from what it expects. The limitation applies to all database vendors. To illustrate this limitation, consider the following scenario: +

Reviewer: What does "it" refer to here?

Reviewer: limitation > consideration
Do you need to say that this applies to all database vendors?

> The *Stored procedure* operation returns data in a format that differs from what it expects. The limitation applies to all database vendors. To illustrate this limitation, consider the following scenario: +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *Stored procedure* operation returns data in a format that differs from what it expects. The limitation applies to all database vendors. To illustrate this behavior, consider the following scenario: +
```

> The *Stored procedure* operation returns data in a format that differs from what it expects. The limitation applies to all database vendors. To illustrate this limitation, consider the following scenario: +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Stored procedure* operation returns data in a format that differs from what it expects. The limitation applies to all database vendors. To illustrate this behavior, consider the following scenario: +
```

> The *Stored procedure* operation is expecting an SQL array or SQL struct on the input which is correctly resolved by using the `prepareArray` and `prepareStruct`  functions. However, when Mule performs the operation, a Java object containing the modified values is returned. As a result, the operation returns data in a different format than the expected one, which can become an issue when chaining stored procedures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Stored procedure* operation expects an SQL array or SQL struct on the input, which is correctly resolved by using the `prepareArray` and `prepareStruct`  functions. However, when Mule performs the operation, a Java object containing the modified values is returned. As a result, the operation returns data in a different format than the expected one, which can become an issue when chaining stored procedures.
```

> Use the xref:database-stored-udt-stored-procedure.adoc#using-preparestruct-and-preparearray-functions[prepareArray and prepareStruct functions] to properly format the data for the *Stored procedure* operation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the xref:database-stored-udt-stored-procedure.adoc#using-preparestruct-and-preparearray-functions[`prepareArray` and `prepareStruct` functions] to properly format the data for the *Stored procedure* operation. 
```

    <db:output-parameters>
        <![CDATA[#[{
            "name": "orderId",
            "type": "INTEGER"
        },
        {
            "name": "totalAmount",
            "type": "DECIMAL"
        },
        {
            "name": "orderDetails",
            "type": "ARRAY"
        }]]]>
    </db:output-parameters>
</db:stored-procedure>
----

== Configure In Out Parameters

Consider a scenario in which you develop a Mule app for an inventory management system to handle the process of updating the stock levels for specific products. In this scenario, the Mule app interacts with a stored procedure named `UpdateStockLevel` in a PostgreSQL database, which requires both input and output parameters.  

This following example illustrates how to configure the *In out parameters* field of the *Stored procedure* operation to manage the stock level updates, including both the input data (product ID and quantity) and the output data (updated stock level).

. In Studio, add a *Database Configuration* element to your MuleSoft app project and configure it with the necessary PostgreSQL database connection details.

> . Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas that retrieves the order information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the *Stored procedure* operation to your canvas to retrieve the order information.
```
